---
layout: post
title:  "What's Bash & CLIs: Open the Terminal"
date: 2022-10-03
author: Deshawn Sambrano
tags: Coding Unix Bash Shell
time: 5
permalink: /cli
draft: true
usemathjax: true
category: cli
series: cli
diff: beginner
---

{% include sidebar.html %}

<section class="takeaways series">

In this series you will learn basics of using the terminal with `bash`. By the end of this you will know:
- Basic commands to traverse your computer from the terminal and how to customize you terminal
- The structure of commands, arguments, and options in `bash`
- Creating a script automate boring tasks
- What Environment Variables, your Path, and a `bashrc` file do

Prerequisites:
- None; This Series will assume no prior expeience, but by the end you will cover some more intermediate to advanced topics

</section>
<!-- This was in the bash section but should probably be added here
First, thing open up your terminal. 
If you are using MacOS or Linux you can expect it to look something like this:

```
NEED to show example can be replaced with an image
```
Explain what each piece means
-->

## What is `Bash` and Why Does it Matter

<!-- excerpt-start -->

`Bash` stands for Bourne Again SHell, and it has been the default shell for decades.
However, recently (since around 2019 or so) both MacOS and many Linux distros switched the default shell to `zsh` (or The Z SHell). 
This is basically entirely compatible with <!-- excerpt-end -->`bash` except that it adds some nice quality of life improvements that are beyond the scope of this series, but feel free to explore on your own ([differences bewteen `bash` and `zsh`][shelldiff]).
So unless otherwise stated, all the commands in this series will work for both shells.

<!-- excerpt-end -->

Knowing what OS you are on is super important as the terminal commands change across them. 
Luckily Linux and MacOS share essentially all of the commands because they use the same shell (formerly `bash`, now `zsh`). 
In contrast, Windows uses CMD or Powershell which has a differnt syntax and command list. 
Luckily though, there are two options to get access to `bash` using Windows [see below][windowbash].
I highly reccomand that you use one of these projects to be able to follow along in this series if you are on a Windows machine.

`Bash` is incredibly useful to know because all servers and super computers/computing clusters all run Linux, so having familiarity with this shell via using MacOS/Linux is invaluable, if you want a career involving IT, software engineering, datascience, computer science, etc. Knowing `bash` will help in all of those feilds.
Additionally, most of the time if you get some CLI (command line interface) tutorial or code it will assume bash, so its just a good skill to have even if you are just a general computer tinkerer.

### Mac

If this is your first time I recommend you use the default apple terminal. You can use spotlight search (Keyboard Shortcut: `⌘` + `Spacebar`) and type terminal to get the default terminal experience. Alternatively, it can be found in the utilities folder inside your applications folder. 

Once opened, I highly recommend, you opening up the preferences with `⌘` + `,` and adjust your colors in the profile tab.
Once you picked a theme and/or adjusted the colors make sure you save them by clicking the default button at the bottom left.
You may been to quit and reopen the app for them to take effect permanantly.

This might sound silly, but changing your colors can make huge difference. 
Having a good looking terminal WILL ACTUALLY MAKE YOU A BETTER CODER.
The more pleasing you find you terminal the more you will want to use it, and therefore, the more practice you will get. 
That extra practice and motivation can make a world of difference.

### Linux

Let's be honest, you know how this works.

### Windows

I ***HIGHLY*** reccomand that you use one of these projects to be able to follow along in this series.
As, I will not discuss the `Powershell` shell at all.
Since its not available by default you will need to download some software.
If you are a beginner, I would reccomend [gitbash][], which is designed to give you access to the unix commands and meant to help with git specifically.
More advanced user may try the [Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)][wsl], which is built by microsoft to allow you to directly use Linux from within your Windows machine.


## What is a Command-Line Interface/CLI?

<!-- excerpt-start -->

Like with most acronyms its often easiest to understand each word first.
For CLIs the first word is Command-line.
This refers to your terminal emulator (or just termial for short), more specifically the command you enter into your terminal (for more details click the words below).
<!-- excerpt-end -->
<details markdown=0>
	<summary>Console</summary>
	<p>
		A console is a physical terminal, which you probably have never seen before. You might hear it in code/tech circles, but almost always they are refering to the terminal/terminal emulator.
	</p> 
</details>
<details markdown=0>
	<summary>Terminal</summary>
	<p>
		A Terminal Emulator or terminal for short emulates a console so that you can interface with the computer with the command-line. Modern terminal have a plethora a upgrades compared to days past such as customization history settings, mouse features, etc.
	</p> 
</details>
<details markdown=0>
	<summary>Command-line</summary>
	<p>
		The command-line is the area to the right of your command-prompt (by default its <code>$</code>). This is where you actually enter the command that you wish to be executed by the terminal.
	</p> 
</details>
<details markdown=0>
	<summary>Shell</summary>
	<p>
		The shell is the command-line interpreter, in other words its the language you use then using the command-line. The most common example of course it <code>bash</code>, but <code>zsh</code> is super popular since it is now the default for MacOS and many Linux Distros.
	</p> 
</details>
<br>

And of course the I stands for interface, or just a way for someone to interact with an app/program.
So putting it all together a CLI is simply just a way of interacting with different programs or apps from the terminal as opposed to having to open up the GUI (or graphical user interface: the normal way to interact with an app which typically allows you to click buttons to use it).


CLIs have a ton of benefits, first they are significantly faster.
Many programs, especially the big ones take a long time to even start up/open the GUI.
If you learn to effectively use CLIs, you can often complete the task from the terminal before you would have even been able to open the app.
Second, in many cases CLIs are much more powerful then using a GUI because you have access to all the apps functionality, where GUIs need to have made/implemented that button for the feature to be accessed. So if you learn to use the command-line, you might gain additional functionality for your apps that you were not able to do via the GUI.

Finally, and s most importantly, CLIs allow you program your interactions with an application.
By programmatically scripting your actions, you automate the whole process.
So, let's imagine you had 50 images that you need to change the name of for an experiment (or just to be more organized).
To do this via the GUI you would need to open Finder or Windows Explorer, right click, then click rename, then change the name of that individual image, then rinse and repeat. Even for people who know all the keyboard shortcuts (btw they are `enter` for MacOS and `F2` for Windows), this would take a long time.
But with a CLI you can do the whole thing with a few lines of code.
This might look scary at first, but over the course of this series you will know exactly what code like this means (btw this will rename a bunch of images for you).

```bash
i=1
for filename in *.jpg; do
  new_name = "img_$i.jpg"
  echo "Change $filname to $new_name"
  mv filname $new_name;
  i=$((i + 1))
done
```

Of course this is not an isolated use case, you might need to convert word documents to PDFs or create an entire folder struture for a new project; heck, I even use CLIs to check everytime I update my CV/Resume to autmatically update my website with the changes and automatically link to any new publications or presentations. 
Some other super cool use cases for CLIs that I use include watching Anime from the terminal with a [CLI][anime-terminal] and downloading all the apps I used, install all the fonts, and change all my settings to my prefered options on a new computer. Once you have the ability to programmatically control these actions, the world is your osyter, and you are only limited by your imagination. 

If you are not convinced that CLIs are amazing, then I am not sure what else I can say.
But I am sure most of you are intrigues at this point.
So over the course of this series, I will start you off on how to use CLIs. 
You will learn how to used the basic commands and how to put them together into a script to run at your own leasure without having to type them all out each time. 

<!-- So, let's imagine you had 10 word documents that you wanted to convert to PDFs.
To do this via a GUI you would need to open each up, go to the file tab, click save as, then change the format, then click PDF, then change the name if applicable -->

[wsl]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install "Windows Subsystem for Linux"
[shelldiff]: https://linuxhint.com/differences_between_bash_zsh/ "Differences between Bash and ZSH"
[munix]: https://github.com/ibraheemdev/modern-unix "Modern Unix"
[gitbash]: https://gitforwindows.org/ "Git for Windows"
[iTerm2]: https://iterm2.com/ "iTerm2: Terminal Emulator for MacOS"
[ohmyzsh]: https://ohmyz.sh/ "Oh My Zsh: Prettify you Terminal"
[bash-structure]: #the-form-of-commands "The Structure of a Bash Command"
[anime-terminal]: https://github.com/whoisYoges/anime-terminal "CLI: Anime from your Terminal"
[windowbash]: #windows
