
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DRM9-L5hcMM

This is specifically for people with a PhD -> data science

- You need SQL no way around that, go get a simple certificate, its not complicated, but you need to know it
- In academy, you need highlight how you are different from your reference point. Imagine, that you described, you code and create experiments to test hypothesize and read a lot of papers and synthesize really dense material into more digestable takeaways and present and publish and teach... A PI would say, yeah you just described literally what ever PhD ever does, but what do you do. We got good at describing these super technical ways in which we are different from our peers. In industry, the have no clue what any of that means and DONT care. They care about all the stuff you just skipped over, because that is what is valuable. 
- I heard from an advisor that when the HR manager, said when he applied they believed him. This is something we are not used to in academia. We have to constantly justify why we are qualified to do x, y, or z. In industry this is not the case. They see you have a PhD and says yeah got it, you are smart. They believe you when you say you can do the job. What they are looking for then, is can you mesh well with their environment, can you communicate the things that are clear in your mind and to literally nobody else. This is what makes you hirable. Insert source from Laura which said that tech skills are the 7th most important things employers are looking for. Of course for DS it will be a little bit higher, but not by much. They need to know you can do the job, just after that they just want someone who fits with them.
- Your Resume is so so so different from a CV. CV you include everything, you are convinced it is all really important. In a resume it should be highly tailored you basically want to match your skills section with the job posting (of course be honest though). If you are luck enough to have gone to an elite school like Harvard, then in reality as long as you match up the job posting things, you will probably get to the second round. Its important to note the first round is extremely low level. Imagine someone who does not know anything about data reviewing your resume. They just want to make sure that what you are skilled at matches the job, just make sure it matches the job post
- honing on this again because you really want to focus on the fact that soft skills are the most important, being about to work in a team, being about to communicate high level concepts to others etc. Remember in your main role you will need to communicate the main takeaways of the data to people that don't understand data. You should take time to improve at this skill as much as possible

